proposal: SR-IOV Interfaces Assignment Fix (#185)
kubevirt/community: design-proposals/sriov-interfaces-mapping.md

# Overview

> Accurately associate VMs SR-IOV interfaces with the underlying SR-IOV Virtual Functions (VF) devices (PCI) allocated by the sriov-network-device-plugin and sriov-cni.

Author: Note that for secondary SR-IOV networks Kubevirt VMs consume VFs with vfio-pci driver and not "network-device  mode" VFs in order to pass through them to the guest
https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/virtual_machines/interfaces_and_networks/#how-to-expose-sr-iov-vfs-to-kubevirt.

In any case, if a CNI reports the PCI address of the VF according to the NPWG docs,
it will be reflected in the networks-status annotations and the mapping will be correct (as mentioned in the doc, if the network-to-pci info is missing Kubevirt falls back to the legacy mapping method)

As for the primary network, as long as the VF is in "network device mode" Kubevirt will wire it up transparently.
Thanks for the heads up, I will add changes to reflect that it's also supported.

> Accurately associate VMs SR-IOV interfaces with the underlying SR-IOV Virtual Functions (VF) devices (PCI) allocated by the sriov-network-device-plugin and sriov-cni.

Author: Following the discussion at https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/8226#discussion_r940012523, no need to reflect the mentioned above.

> Accurately associate VMs SR-IOV interfaces with the underlying SR-IOV Virtual Functions (VF) devices (PCI) allocated by the sriov-network-device-plugin and sriov-cni.

Author: Moved to goals, and rephrased the overview.

The proposal fixes the current solution, where VFs from the same resource pool are not differentiated by KubeVirt and therefore potentially wrongly plugged to the domain.

## Motivation
[KubeVirt’s SR-IOV support](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/virtual_machines/interfaces_and_networks/#sriov) enables wiring up SR-IOV Virtual Functions (VF) to VMs
by passing its PCI device ID from the node, through the virt-launcher pod, and then into the VM using [Libvirt](https://libvirt.org/) API.
<br/>
Each VM SR-IOV device (i.e: VF) is associated with a VM secondary network.

When a VM is defined with multiple SR-IOV devices from the same [resource pool](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/sriov-network-device-plugin#configurations)

> or connected to the same NetworkAttachmentDefinition, Kubevirt cannot differentiate which VF is associated with which requested device.

Author: Done (all over)

> The root cause is that the PCI information passed by the sriov-network-device-plugin though kubelet is not enough to directly map the VFs with their secondary networks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The root cause is that the PCI information passed by the sriov-network-device-plugin through kubelet is not enough to directly map the VFs with their secondary networks.
```

The outcome is a non-consistent association between the underlying VFs and the VM networks,
leaving the VM in a state where the VFs are plugged into the domain wrongly.
<br/>
For example, when a SR-IOV interface is defined with a custom MAC address (e.g: 02:00:00:00:00), a custom guest PCI address of (e.g: 0000:01:01.1) and pointing to a NetworkAttachmentDefinition with VLAN configuration (e.g: 100).

> It is not guaranteed that the correct VF (with VLAN 100) will be plugged into the domain on the specified PCI address (0000:01:01.1).

Author: Done

This issue also manifests when the VM interface boot order is set, the VM may end up booting from the wrong interface.

> A side effect of this issue is the VM status that may confuse its consumers, with its false advertisement, make them act incorrectly, and introduce other issues.

Author: Done, I rephrased it and removed the example.

<br/>
For example, the cluster admin may mistakenly think that other network appliances are not configured correctly (e.g: router).
Kubevirt should plug the correct VF with the correct properties into the domain,
and the user inside the guest should be able to predict and assume a consistent SR-IOV NIC setup.

## Goal
Each VM SR-IOV interface should be associated with the correct VF.

## Non-Goals
Fix/change third-party components (e.g: Multus, SR-IOV CNI, etc..)

## Existing Implementation Flow
In order to discover and allocate VFs to Pods the [sriov-network-device-plugin](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/sriov-network-device-plugin#sr-iov-network-device-plugin) (from now on sriov-dp) and the [sriov-cni](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/sriov-cni) are being used.
<br/>
The sriov-dp provides an [API to create resource pools](https://github.com/openshid/sriov-network-device-plugin#configurations) of VFs according to various properties,

> Each resource pool is labeled with a resource name.

Author: Done

> In the VMI spec, secondary networks point to the desired SR-IOV NetworkAttachmentDefinition object.

Author: Done

> The NetworkAttachmentDefinition is set with the Multus networks-status annotation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NetworkAttachmentDefinition is set with the Multus `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName` annotation:
```

> The NetworkAttachmentDefinition is set with the Multus networks-status annotation:

Author: Done

<br/>`k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName=<resource name>`<br/>
which later on passed down by Multus to the sriov-cni [[1]](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni/blob/a28f5cb56c79a582f5ea2b35a61b38f34b937930/examples/README.md#passing-down-device-information).
```yaml
kind: VirtualMachine
  ...
spec:
  domain:
    devices:
      interfaces:
      - name: sriovnet1
        sriov: {}
    ...
  networks:
  - name: sriovnet1
    multus:
      networkName: default/sriov-network-vlan100
  ...
```
```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  name: sriov-network-vlan100
  namespace: default
  annotations:
    k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName: kubevirt.io/sriov_net
spec:
  config: |-
    {
        "type":"sriov",
  ...
```

> As part of Pod creation flow, kubelet executes the required device plugins according to the Pod spec, in our case the sriov-dp.

Reviewer: Please consider giving a little background on how a Pod with SR-IOV is provisioned for the reader to better understand the problem:
1. kubelet calls the DP in order to allocate one or more VFs from a certain resource name.
2. Kubelet calls the container runtime in order to create the pod sandbox.
3. Container runtime calls Multus which does the association between network name, interface name, resource name and allocated PCI address.
4. Multus calls the SR-IOV CNI which configures the VF.
5. Multus adds the operation results in the Pod's `network-status` annotation.

The virt-launcher Pod has:
Several environment variables to map from:
1. Resource name to a list of allocated PCI addresses.
2. Network name to resource name.

Which are not enough to correctly associate VM's network and network interface with the actual VF that was previously configured and is represented as a PCI address.

Author: Thanks for the information you summarized it well.
Initially, I added this background after a few iterations of reviews, we came to the conclusion that it's too much information for the reader to grasp.
I agree it will give more background and thorough understanding, but note that for the common reader it may add more noise and distraction from the gist of the problem we try to fix.

Reviewer: The main point of this explanation is that KubeVirt depends on an association that is made by Multus, and is reflected by it.
AFAIK, there is no other place to get this information from, other than the `network-status` annotation.

Author: I think the point that Kubevirt depends on Multus network-status annotation is expressed in the doc, isn't it?

Regarding the addendum, as you may already know, the flow of pod provisioning with secondary networks hides lots of nuances and various concepts such as but not only: device manager and device plugin API, CNI device info spec, and how Multus works.
Sure we can add a brief summary, but I am afraid it may leave the readers with a vague understanding (or even more confusion) since there are quite a lot of subjects to cover, and just mentioning it is not enough IMO.

As a side note, this is a proposal to fix certain functionality, it expects the reader to have a basic understanding of how Kubevirt and Multus integrate.
I tried to keep it detailed yet not overwhelming, compared to other proposals I think this proposal is pretty detailed.

      fieldRef:
      fieldPath: metadata.annotations['virt-metadata']
      ...
```

> **_Note_**: The annotation details will be populated at `/etc/podinfo/virt-metadata` file inside the pod.
> Any change to the annotation will be reflected in the file.

3. As part of virt-launcher VMI spec rendering, given the downward API file exists (e.g: `/etc/podinfo/virt-metadata` file),
access the network-to-pci-address data, lookup for the PCI address based on the network name and create each SR-IOV HostDevice accordingly.

4. If the file doesn't exist, fall back to the legacy mapping method (based on environment variables).

##### Backward compatibility
- On post Kubevirt upgrade new virt-controller will treat new and old VMIs and their pod in the same manner - adding the virt-metadata annotation on the pods.

- No disruption to already existing VMIs workloads, though the SR-IOV mapping may not be correct.

##### Pros
1. This solution involves only virt-controller and virt-launcher.
2. The mapping info is passed down using the standard Kubernetes mechanism (Downward API) with no need to add additional logic.
3. Flexibility, no API change to VM or VMI objects.

##### Cons

> 2. Depends on Downward API feature and volume mount on the Pod.

Reviewer 2: In general I just prefer to not add more mounts. I am pretty sure it is not a problem to mount to a few pods the volume where a sriov device is required, it may be a problem if we add it to all pods. If possible I would want to avoid it, but without further investigations I would have no prove that it would create an issue. If we can avoid it (for a big set of pods), we just don't have to investigate it.

### New Mapping Algorithm
Currently, virt-launcher uses the information from the `PCIDEVICE` and `KUBEVIRT_RESOURCE_NAME` environment variables,
the proposal is to use the information from Multus `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks-status` annotation in order to map between the SR-IOV interfaces and the underlying VF PCI address.

#### Mapping logic
1. Map the `interface` field in networks-status annotation to VMI spec.networks:
- On pod creation, a network request annotation (`k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks`) is created on the virt-launcher pod [[1]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/c4b6ae63c5a7f642ab86b0755dabca3b814ecb39/pkg/virt-controller/services/template.go#L1692).

>   - The annotation creates a network request per each non-default multus network.<br/>For each CNI entry, each name is given an indexed name `net#` saved on is set in the `interface` field, acting as an identifier.

Author: I will change it to refer to primary network as well.

>   - The annotation creates a network request per each non-default multus network.<br/>For each CNI entry, each name is given an indexed name `net#` saved on is set in the `interface` field, acting as an identifier.

Author: For visibility, following the discussion at https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/8226#discussion_r940012523, no need to change the mentioned above.

### Cons
1. Requires API changes to virt-handler to virt-launcher commands API [[7]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/1a8f08103e48c5f2bb2f5826d118507ce7ec1f0c/pkg/handler-launcher-com/cmd/v1/cmd.pb.go) [[8]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/1a8f08103e48c5f2bb2f5826d118507ce7ec1f0c/pkg/handler-launcher-com/cmd/v1/cmd.pb.go#L334).
2. virt-handler needs to fetch the pod object in order to get the mapping information.

## 4. Expose network-to-pci mapping through the VMI status
This option uses the same basic ideas from [option 2](#2.virt-controller-exposes-network-to-pci-mapping-through-two-VMI-annotations) but instead of using VMI annotations it
uses VMI Status additional fields to persist the mapping.

1. Extend the VMI status API to reflect each SR-IOV interface underlying PCI address.

2. The virt-controller updates the status fields with the mapping information.

3. virt-launcher VMI extract the network-to-pci mapping from the VMI status and create each HostDevice accordingly.<br/>
   In case there is not enough information in the VMI status (i.e: missing host PCI address) fall back to legacy mapping method. 

#### Pros
1. No need for annotations.

#### Cons

> 1. The status field will have to support mapping from two pods, supporting migration.

Reviewer 2: Yes that is a one-time action, where luckily most entrypoints already exist since we already have to cleanup the status after migrations. Then we are in the good situation that we don't have to think about separate flows anymore.

> 2. It is confusing to use the VMI status as an input to the virt-launcher.

Reviewer 2: If you like you can also extract it from there and pass it via `VirtualMachineOptions` which passes in a lot of info already, which is not in the spec but needed to create correct libvirt xml files.

> 3. The host PCI address is now exposed to the user and may be confusing.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it is more confusing than huge annotations on pods. We already track a lot of internal stuff there which users can not directly use for anything specific, like migration ports and so forth. I would not worry about that.

Reviewer 3: As this option suggests to add this information to the vmi-status, I think it would be rather confusing that the user configures the vmi with guest PCI-Address, like so:
```
kind: VirtualMachine
…
spec:
  domain:
    devices:
      interfaces:
      - name: sriovnet1
        pciAddress: 0000:00:01.0
        sriov: {}
    …
  networks:
  - name: sriovnet1
    multus:
      networkName: default/sriov-network-vlan100
```
(`0000:00:01.0` being the pci-address as it will appear on the guest)

and the vmi-status would show something like this 
```
apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
  kind: VirtualMachineInstance
...
  spec:
...
  status:
    guestOSInfo:
...
    interfaces:
    - infoSource: domain, guest-agent
      interfaceName: eth0
...
    - infoSource: domain, guest-agent
      interfaceName: eth1
      ipAddress: fe80::a8bb:ccff:fedd:ee01
      ipAddresses:
      - fe80::a8bb:ccff:fedd:ee01
      hostPciAddress: 0000:40:20.0
```

My point being, this pci-address is for internal use, and thus should not appear in the vmi-status. 
Also consider the complication of how to expose this while in migration.

Reviewer 2: > My point being, this pci-address is for internal use, and thus should not appear in the vmi-status.

Yes I understand your concern. I would just not mix it. I would favor something like this:

```
status:
  nodeInfo:
     "node01":
        interfaces:
          [...]
     "node02":
        [...]
```

and just clear the whole entry from there after a migration success or failure. The annotation proposal may be even simpler, but this is simple too and it follows all conventions with the advantages mentioned.

As said, we already include a lot of info regarding to migrations and so forth which are not relevant for users either.

Reviewer 2: Especially, if this route is given, we will never have to differentiate or change the info flow on this level not matter what comes in the future. The other approach sounds tempting now, but does not guarantee at all that this approach is not needed too at some point.

As I understand it, the proposals were mostly driven by the assumption that metadata has to be used one or the other way, since info like this can't be in the vmi status or the pod status. At least that is how I understood the feedback on the PR. I would reconsider it with the new info provided.

            "interface": "net1",
            "dns": {},
            "device-info": {
                "type": "pci",
                "version": "1.0.0",
                "pci": {
                    "pci-address": "0000:04:02.5"
                }
            }
        },{
            "name": "default/sriov-network-vlan200",
            "interface": "net2",
            "dns": {},
            "device-info": {
                "type": "pci",
                "version": "1.0.0",
                "pci": {
                    "pci-address": "0000:04:02.2"
                }
            }
        }
    ]
```

> **_Note_**: Multus provides PCI device information since version v3.7.

> **_Note_**: in order to maintain backward compatibility, when the annotation is missing, virt-launcher will fall back to naive mapping and use the legacy environment variable.

> **_Note_**: Once a Pod reaches Running state, the CNI operation is finished successfully and the annotation will present on the Pod.

### Annotations Exposure Method
A subset of the information in the networks-status annotation needs to be passed down to the virt-launcher for composing the right domain configuration.

> There have been several methods explored, recorded in Appendix 1 - Alternative Annotations Exposure Methods .

Author: Done

In this section the chosen method is explained.

#### Expose networks-status annotation to virt-launcher Pod
The annotation content can be exposed inside virt-launcher Pod using [Kubernetes Downward API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/downward-api-volume-expose-pod-information/):

virt-controller creates “virt-metadata” annotation that will hold generic information about the pod that we want to expose to the virt-launcher pod user.

1. Given the networks-status annotation, process the content and compose 1:1 mapping between a (VMI) network from it and the device PCI address information and add it to virt-metadata annotation.
For example:
```yaml
kubevirt.io/virt-metadata: |-
{
  network-to-pci-address: 
  {

>     “sriov-network-vlan-100”: “0000:04:02.5”,

Author: Done

>     “sriov-network-vlan-200”: “0000:04:02.2”

Author: Done

  }
}
```

2. Mount virt-metadata annotation using Downward API as part of virt-launcher Pod creation:

> ...

Reviewer 3: this lacks markdown

Author: Done

          "mac": "aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:00",
          "dns": {}
      },{
          "name": "default/sriov-network-vlan100",
          "interface": "net2",
          "mac": "aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:01",
          "dns": {},
          "device-info": {
              "type": "pci",
              "version": "1.0.0",
              "pci": {
                  "pci-address": "0000:65:00.2"
              }
      },{
          "name": "default/sriov-network-vlan100",
          "interface": "net3",
          "mac": "aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:02",
          "dns": {},
          "device-info": {
              "type": "pci",
              "version": "1.0.0",
              "pci": {
                  "pci-address": "0000:65:00.3"
              }
          }
      }]
```

Since we’re only interested in the SRIOV networks, the network-name-to-pci-address mapping will be:
- sriovnet-vlan100-secondary-mac ⇒ 0000:65:00.2
- sriovnet-vlan100-third-mac ⇒ 0000:65:00.3

> **_Note_**:
> We are relying on the fact that the “interface” naming convention in [[2]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/c4b6ae63c5a7f642ab86b0755dabca3b814ecb39/pkg/virt-controller/services/template.go#L1692) will remain the same.

> > To ensure that, we plan cover it with e2e test in case the naming logic is changed without doing the same in the SRIOV device creation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> To ensure that, we plan move this logic to a new package that will be used for all scenarios related to this annotations. Moreover, this will be covered in e2e test in case the naming logic is changed without using the new package.
```

Author: Sounds good, done.

|:------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Already existing VMs<br/>(old virt-launcher)          | 1. No regression <br/> VFs mapping might be wrong. | 2. No regression <br/><br/>VFs mapping might be wrong.<br/>virt-controller annotates the VMI with the network status annotation from the pod,but virt-launcher will not use it.                                                  |
| VM creation/restart/migration<br/>(new virt-launcher) | -                                                  | 4. No regression<br/>Once the VM is restarted, VMI or Pod is re-created, the new SR-IOV interfaces assignment logic will apply.<br/>In case the VM is migrated, the VM on target will have SR-IOV interfaces assigned correctly. |

#### Conclusion

> - (2) virt-controller will add the network-status to the VMI, the guest will have no disruption and its VFs mapping will not change.

Reviewer 3: how about this?
```suggestion
- (related to solution section 2) virt-controller will add the network-status to the VMI, the guest will have no disruption and its VFs mapping will not change.
```

Author: Isn't it clear from the numbering to which cell each bullet is related in the table?
I am asking because I think it's cleaner with only the numbering.

- (4) When virt-controller pods are is upgraded, new VMs will be created with the correct SR-IOV interfaces assignment.

### Pros
1. No need to use Downward API and mount its Volume.
2. No need to read files and parse their content.
3. No API changes.

### Cons
1. Require patching the VMI metadata by virt-controller VMIController [[4]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/1a8f08103e48c5f2bb2f5826d118507ce7ec1f0c/pkg/virt-controller/watch/vmi.go#L1054)  [[5]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/1a8f08103e48c5f2bb2f5826d118507ce7ec1f0c/pkg/virt-controller/watch/vmi.go#L509).

2. Won't play nice with live migration.<br/>On migration there will be two sources for the networks-status annotation, the migration source and target pods, the VMI might end up with having the network-status annotation with the wrong annotation details.

> ### Extending each VMI underlying virt-launcher Pod networks-status annotation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 2. Extending each VMI underlying virt-launcher Pod networks-status annotation
```

Reviewer 3: Or maybe 1.1?

Author: Done

Following Cons (2), in order to ensure that the correct mapping information is passed down to virt-launcher, it is necessary to record each of the VMI virt-launcher pods networks-status annotation.

1. virt-controller look into each of the VMI underlying virt-launcher pods and read their networks-status annotation.
For each networks-status annotation add an identifier to the annotation name of the pod it belongs (e.g: pod name, UID, etc..) and copy it to the VMI annotations.

#### Example
```yaml
kind: VirtualMachine
...
metadata:
  annotations:
    kubevirt.io/virt-launcher-networks-status: “{
      “virt-launcher-abc123”: “...”,
      “virt-launcher-xyz456”: “...”
  }”
...
```

2. virt-launcher pick the relevant details form the annotation and perform the mapping accordingly. 

#### Pros
1. The correct information required to perform the mapping is passed down even on migration. 
 
#### Cons
2. Requires virt-controller to monitor and update the annotation content according to the existence of each pod (migration source and target pods).

## 2.Expose Network Status Annotation via VMI metadata by virt-handler

> As part of the virt-handler VM create / update flow, the VMI spec is processed and virt-launcher is triggered to synchronize with the new VMI spec [[1]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/1a8f08103e48c5f2bb2f5826d118507ce7ec1f0c/pkg/virt-handler/vm.go#L2639) (i.e: sends [SyncVMI](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/1a8f08103e48c5f2bb2f5826d118507ce7ec1f0c/pkg/virt-launcher/virtwrap/manager.go#L822) gRPC call to virt-launcher).

Reviewer 3: maybe worth mentioning that we will need the extended `kubevirt.io/virt-launcher-networks-status` annotations for this as well

Author: Note that it is mentioned at line 681, do you think it should be mentioned anyway?

    <driver name='vfio'/>
    <source>
          <address domain='0x0000' bus='0x04' slot='0x02' function='0x4'/>
    </source>
    <address type='pci' domain='0x0000' bus='0x06' slot='0x00' function='0x0'/>
  </hostdev>
  <hostdev mode='subsystem' type='pci' managed='no'>
    <alias name='ua-sriov-sriovnet-vlan200'/>
    <driver name='vfio'/>
    <source>
          <address domain='0x0000' bus='0x04' slot='0x02' function='0x5'/>
    </source>
    <address type='pci' domain='0x0000' bus='0x07' slot='0x00' function='0x0'/>
  </hostdev>
```

#### Summary
| SR-IOV VFs device pool name | kubevirt.io/sriov_net      |
|:----------------------------|:---------------------------|
| VM networks names           | sriovnet100, sriovnet200   |
| Allocated VFs PCI addresses | 0000:04:03.6, 0000:04:03.7 |

When HostDevice object is created its PCI address is picked as follows:
networkToResource["sriovnet100"]  -------------------------> "kubevirt.io/sriov_net"
addressesByResource["kubevirt.io/sriov_net"] ---------> "0000:04:03.6"

There is no guarantee that "0000:04:03.6" is the correct PCI address for the network "sriovnet100"  and that the VF is configured with VLAN 100.

> This example shows that the current environment variable PCIDEVICE (given by sriov-dp) is simply not enough to directly map between the VM’s networks and  the VFs PCI address.

Reviewer 2: Could you explain why this does not need a fix in sriov-dp? Do other applications in such a situation not care about knowing which device is which, if they have different configuration?

Author: Device plugins are executed before the CNI plugin does, in our care the sriov-dp execute first and allocates the VFs later on the sriov-cni is executed and configures the VFs according to the network config (passed by the NetworkAttachmentDefinition).
(I guess this is why those components are independent and not a single entity.)
At the time the sriov-dp is executed it doesn't have enough information to distinguish between the VFs it allocates, it doesn't have the network config.
The NPWG device-info doc explains it well:
https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/device-info-spec#current-state--limitations

Applications that need to distinguish between such devices, should expose the networks-status annotation through the downward API. This topic is also mentioned NPWG device info doc check this out: 
https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/device-info-spec#workflow-summary (last bullet).

Reviewer 2: so, if the status annotation from multus already contains the information on the virt-launcher pod, why would we need our own virt-metadata annotation? I probably miss something.

Author: The networks-status annotation includes more information regarding the pod secondary NICs such as: NetworkAttachmentDefinition object names, the cluster CNI plugin name, pod network subnet, and basically whatever a CNI reporters according to the device-info spec.
For example: 
Consider the case where a VM is connected to the same network as the cluster nodes, that NICs status would be reflected on the networks-status annotation.
If there is a malicious entity inside the pod it could have access to that info if the annotation is mounted as is.

The idea is to extract only the relevant SR-IOV interfaces network-to-pci information and add it to the virt-metadata annotation that will be later on mounted to the pod.

Reviewer 2: if there is security relevant info there, then better not to mount it. :+1: I would recommend the existing info flow then through virt-handler.

Reviewer 3: Just to clarify, we are not exposing the network-status data, but rather a digested subset of it (network-pci map).

                "10.244.2.131"
            ],
            "mac": "82:cf:7c:98:43:7e",
            "default": true,
            "dns": {}
        },{
            "name": "default/sriov-network-vlan100",
            "interface": "net1",
            "dns": {},
            "device-info": {
                "type": "pci",
                "version": "1.0.0",
                "pci": {
                    "pci-address": "0000:04:02.5"
                }
            }
        },{
            "name": "default/sriov-network-vlan200",
            "interface": "net2",
            "dns": {},
            "device-info": {
                "type": "pci",
                "version": "1.0.0",
                "pci": {
                    "pci-address": "0000:04:02.2"
                }
            }
        }
    ]
```

> **_Note_**: Multus provides PCI device information since version v3.7.

> **_Note_**: in order to maintain backward compatibility, when the annotation is missing, virt-launcher will fall back to naive mapping and use the legacy environment variable.

> **_Note_**: Once a Pod reaches Running state, the CNI operation is finished successfully and the annotation will present on the Pod.

> ### Annotations Exposure Method

Reviewer 2: In general I would stay away from annotations whenever possible. Multus has to make use of them, but we should not use them if not absolutely necessary. Neither on the VMI, nor on the Pod.

Author: In general totaly agree, but in this case inevitable because  there is no way to get the network-to-pci mapping from an API other than from Multus network-status annotation.

Note that we use `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks` annotation in order to connect the pod to secondary networks.
The `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks-status` annotation is the result of that operation.

Reviewer 2: Yes, if we have to integrate with third-party apps which use it there may be no other way. I am not against using existing multus annotations. I am just arguing about adding additional ones where we already have better communication pathes.

```yaml
...
spec:
containers:
- name: “compute”
  ...
  volumeMounts:
    - name: virt-metadata-annotation
      mountPath: /etc/podinfo
      ...
      volumes:
- name: virt-metadata-annotation
  downwardAPI:
  items:
    - path: "virt-metadata"
      fieldRef:
      fieldPath: metadata.annotations['virt-metadata']
      ...
```

> **_Note_**: The annotation details will be populated at /etc/podinfo/virt-metadata file inside the pod.
Any change to the annotation will be reflected in the file.

3. As part of virt-launcher VMI spec conversion to Libvirt domain,
Given the file that is mounted as a result of the downward API exists (e.g: /etc/podinfo/virt-metadata file).
Access the network-to-pci-address data, lookup for the PCI address based on the network name and create each SR-IOV HostDevice accordingly.

4. If the file doesn't exist, fall back to the legacy mapping method (based on environment variables).

##### Backward compatibility
- On post Kubevirt upgrade new virt-controller will treat new and old VMIs and their pod in the same manner - adding the virt-metadata annotation on the pods.

- Already existing VMIs that runs old version of virt-launcher pods...

##### Pros

> 1. This solution's involves only virt-controller and virt-launcher.

Reviewer 2: I would see this additional communication channel as a con, since it is another dimension to consider in the communication. The established gRPC interface looses integrity and one has to know about more  exceptions.

That has for instance implications when thinking about the cloud hypervisor PoC. We have a nice interface already, which we would weaken.

Author: I understand your point and agree its there should be single communication channel,
note that from what we tired, piggiy-backing the current "medium" involves more complex logic than the one suggested (mounting the annotation), also it brings more complexities such as when a VM is migrated or when the migration is canceled.

Regarding cloud hypervisor PoC, I think there will be no implications because passing down the network-to-pci mapping does not involve the hypervisor, this mapping information eventually passes to Libvirt.

Reviewer 2: > I understand your point and agree its there should be single communication channel,
note that from what we tired, piggiy-backing the current "medium" involves more complex logic than the one suggested (mounting the annotation), also it brings more complexities such as when a VM is migrated or when the migration is canceled.

Yes, except the entrypoints for picking or deleting an entry from a map on the status are already there for these scenarios. They just have to be extended once in a generic way (like a map based on cluster-name, where it just deletes the cluster info in question after a successful or deleted migration). That sounds much easier to me than, as an engineer having to consider that parts of the info are attached to the pod as annotation and parts are attached on the vmi status.

We then also don't have to consider things like:
 * how big will the pod get from a transfer perspective? If we hit an etcd limit, it may be the fault of the multus annotation, we are not involved
 * is some information needed for doing some potentially security sensitive task? If yes, we potentially have issues retrieving it in a trusted way from the launcher-pod-downwards-api location to virt-handler.
 
 Note that if the existing multus annotation already has the information needed to fix the sriov issue, this is a completely different discussion. Just using the annotation and extract the info from there to get it to the converter, is still a little bit weird, but a completely different discussion than introducing such a communication channel.

Reviewer 2: > Regarding cloud hypervisor PoC, I think there will be no implications because passing down the network-to-pci mapping does not involve the hypervisor, this mapping information eventually passes to Libvirt.

The cloud-hyperviso PoC is pure cloud-hypervisor with its own virt-launcher, just using our gRPC protocol. Libvirt is not involved. Especially this would discussion here would probably not have any impact on it for a very long time, since we are for sure far away from adding SRIOV there, but it makes it in general more difficult to extend kubevirt if multiple info-flows exist to virt-launcher.

> 2. The mapping info is passed down using the standard Kubernetes mechanism (Downward API) with no need to add additional logic.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if there is a significant difference regarding to the additional logic. virt-launcher definitely is more complex.

I would kind of agree if we would not have the established path already, which includes status cleanup after migrations.

Author: From what we tried there is quite different, other solutions than mounting the networks-status annotation
involve maintaining the the VMI status/annotation (that holds the network-to-pci mapping information).
For example: when the VM is migrated or migration is canceled, it requires synchronizing the VMI annotations/status from two different sources (source and target pods).

Note that in any case, we need to do the virt-launcher part, where the passed network-to-pci mapping is digested and the devices are assigned according to it.

> 3. Flexibility, no API change to VM or VMI objects.

Reviewer 2: we already have to take care of compatibility between virt-handler and virt-controller. If we would  not already have that, and we would not need the other channel I might agree to a certain point.

I would in general not see a schemaless blob on an annotation as a plus.

> To ensure that, we plan move this logic to a new package that will be used for all scenarios related to this annotations. Moreover, this will be covered in e2e test in case the naming logic is changed without using the new package.
> One could suggest relying on the  MAC address as an identifier instead of relying on the indexation logic, but that is simply not good enough since the MAC address field is not mandatory field.

##### Backward compatibility:
The mapping mentioned above could fail for several reasons, among them:
- networks-status annotation is not present on the vmi
- networks-status annotation does not hold the PCI address information for all the SRIOV interfaces
- Annotation is not valid

Such a case can happen if the networks-status annotation is breaking the API or Multus deployed on the cluster is older than v3.7.
In any case, in the event of a mapping failure, we will simply use the old mapping, in order to not break old VMIs on old clusters.

# Appendix 1: Alternative Annotations Exposure Methods

> ## 1. virt controller exposes network to pci mapping through the VMI annotations

Reviewer 2: I don't see here the established communication flow considered:

 * virt-controller writes the node mapping to  the VMI status
 * virt-handler extracts the info for the current node the VMI s running on and sends it with its [VirtualMachineOptions](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/c4b6ae63c5a7f642ab86b0755dabca3b814ecb39/pkg/handler-launcher-com/cmd/v1/cmd.pb.go#L334) construct over to the domain xml converter to virt-launcher
 * works the same for a migration target virt-handler
 * we also already have a status cleanup happen after migrations, which can remove the old host entry and only keep the current one. Also virt-controller could do the cleanup, since it already provides the info in the first place.
 
 Where I would agree that would not make sense:
 
  * trying to modify the VMI status in a way in virt-handler so that virt-launcher would only see relevant info. We don't need such tricks. We have VirtualMachineOptions already.

Reviewer 2: Oh one addition: @davidvossel just reminded me that virt-launcher knows the node name already anyway, so using the Options may not even be necessary, which would make it even simpler. Just cleanup after migration would be a topic.

Author: I added the solution you describe at option 4, could you please check and let me know if that is what you meant?

Reviewer 2: Yes looks pretty much accurate. I agree that there is likely a little bit more to code, but afterwards we have to care about much less regarding to any info flow.

Kubevirt should plug the correct VF with the correct properties into the domain,
and the user inside the guest should be able to predict and assume a consistent SR-IOV NIC setup.

## Goal
Each VM SR-IOV interface should be associated with the correct VF.

## Non-Goals
Fix/change third-party components (e.g: Multus, SR-IOV CNI, etc..)

## Existing Implementation Flow
In order to discover and allocate VFs to Pods the [sriov-network-device-plugin](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/sriov-network-device-plugin#sr-iov-network-device-plugin) (from now on sriov-dp) and the [sriov-cni](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/sriov-cni) are being used.
<br/>
The sriov-dp provides an [API to create resource pools](https://github.com/openshid/sriov-network-device-plugin#configurations) of VFs according to various properties,
Each resource pool is labeled with a resource name.

In the VMI spec, secondary networks point to the desired SR-IOV NetworkAttachmentDefinition object.
<br/>
The NetworkAttachmentDefinition is set with the resource-name annotation:
<br/>`k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName=<resource name>`<br/>

> which later on passed down by Multus to the sriov-cni [[1]](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni/blob/a28f5cb56c79a582f5ea2b35a61b38f34b937930/examples/README.md#passing-down-device-information).

Author: Done

<br/>
For example:
<br/>
Given the resource name `kubevirt.io/sriov_net` the following environment variable is set:
<br/>
`PCIDEVICE_KUBEVIRT_IO_SRIOV_NET=<PCI address>`.

As part of the VM create flow, virt-controller renders the given VMI spec and creates the corresponding virt-launcher Pod [[3]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/1a8f08103e48c5f2bb2f5826d118507ce7ec1f0c/pkg/virt-controller/services/template.go#L443) (renderLaunchManifest).
<br/>
For each secondary network:
- Realize the device `resourceName` by fetching the specified NetworkAttachmentDefinition.
- Read the NetworkAttachmentDefinition `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/resourceName` annotation.
- Add the following environment variable to the compute container (spec.Env):<br/>`KUBEVIRT_RESOURCE_NAME_<network name>=<resource name>`

Once virt-launcher Pod is ready, virt-handler process the VMI object and eventually trigger the virt-launcher to synchronize with the new spec (i.e: virt-handler sends gRPC call to virt-launcher [[4]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/1a8f08103e48c5f2bb2f5826d118507ce7ec1f0c/pkg/virt-launcher/virtwrap/manager.go#L822)).
<br/>

> virt-launcher renders the VMI spec and converts it to Libvirt domain XML, and eventually passes it to Libvirt which in turn create the domain.

Author: Done

The VFs PCI address information that being passed down to virt-launcher through `PCIDEVICE` (by sriov-device-plugin) and `KUBEVIRT_RESOURCE_NAME` (by Kubevirt) environment variables, is not enough to map the VFs with their secondary network.
In the scenario where a VM has more than one network that points to a NetworkAttachmentDefinition with the same resource name, VFs might get assigned to the wrong network.

For example:
In the scenario described in https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/6351,
there are two `SriovNetwork` objects - each configures a different VLAN [[1]](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/6351#issuecomment-918467186).
But the VM's networks point to the wrong VFs:
VM network `sriov-vsrx-if30` points to `default/sriov-vsrx-if30` NetworkAttachmentDefinition, which is configured with VLAN 30, but the underlying VF is configured with a different VLAN (i.e. the wrong PCI address was chosen).

The issue manifests on Kubevirt as follows:
<br/>
The SR-IOV network PCI address is determined on virt-launcher code that converts the VMI spec to Libvirt domain.<br/>
Libvirt domain Hostdev is represented in Kubevirt code by the HostDevice object.<br/>

> For each SR-IOV network a corresponding HostDevice object is created, the PCI address assigned as follows:

Author: I am not sure what you mean. inst it already a bullets list?

> For each SR-IOV network a corresponding HostDevice object is created, the PCI address assigned as follows:

Reviewer 4: I mean the markdown code you're providing is [not rendering into a list](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax#lists). 

Check how it renders in https://github.com/kubevirt/community/blob/4cf6bcb2328c135612e9b9b35b20b74dce8bc6a1/design-proposals/sriov-interfaces-mapping.md

> For each SR-IOV network a corresponding HostDevice object is created, the PCI address assigned as follows:

Author: Done

> Once a Pod reaches Running state, the CNI operation is finished successfully and the annotation will present on the Pod.

### Annotations Exposure Method
A subset of the information in the `network-status` annotation needs to be passed down to the virt-launcher for composing the right domain configuration.

There have been several methods explored, recorded in [Appendix 1: Alternative Annotations Exposure Methods](#alternative-solutions).

In this section the chosen method is explained.

#### Expose `network-status` annotation to virt-launcher Pod
The annotation content can be exposed to virt-launcher application using Kubernetes Downward API [[1]](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/downward-api-volume-expose-pod-information/):

virt-controller creates an annotation that will hold the mapping between the (VMI) SR-IOV networks and PCI addresses, e.g: `kubevirt.io/network-to-pci-address`.

1. Given the `network-status` annotation, virt-controller process the content and compose 1:1 mapping between a (VMI) network from it and the device PCI address information.
   Create `network-to-pci-address` annotation with the mapping information, for example:
    ```yaml

>     kubevirt.io/network-to-pci-address: |-

Reviewer 2: This is now focused on sriov solely. So good enough for me to fix the bug at hand. As discussed. :+1: 

Please add that on follow up changes there is still the expectation that you fall in line with the VMI status and remove this information flow and move it over to virt-handler.

This may live long, since temporary solutions tend to live long, but when you start to add more data I would expect that you follow the main communicatino paths and remove this workaround.

Reviewer 3: >Please add that on follow up changes there is still the expectation that you fall in line with the VMI status and remove this information flow and move it over to virt-handler.

Do you mean to add it as comment to the commit or on the code?

Reviewer 2: > Do you mean to add it as comment to the commit or on the code?

a short fixme or so would be nice too yes, but I meant in the proposal, so that we don't start future discussions at 0. Just that this is captured. Also the pros/cons sections are probably not necessarily correctly reflecting the latest discussion points, however I would not insist on reworking them. Just make it clear that eventually it has to be moved to vmi-status.

                    "pci-address": "0000:04:02.2"
                }
            }
        }
    ]
```

> **_Note_**: Multus provides PCI device information since version [v3.7](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni/releases/tag/v3.7).
> In order to maintain backward compatibility, when the annotation is missing, virt-launcher will fall to the current mapping method based on environment variables.
> Once a Pod reaches Running state, the CNI operation is finished successfully and the annotation will present on the Pod.

### Annotations Exposure Method
A subset of the information in the `networks-status` annotation needs to be passed down to the virt-launcher for composing the right domain configuration.

There have been several methods explored, recorded in [Appendix 1: Alternative Annotations Exposure Methods](#alternative-solutions).

In this section the chosen method is explained.

#### Expose `networks-status` annotation to virt-launcher Pod
The annotation content can be exposed to virt-launcher application using Kubernetes Downward API [[1]](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/downward-api-volume-expose-pod-information/):

> virt-controller creates an annotation that will hold the mapping between the (VMI) SR-IOV networks and PCI addresses, e.g: `kubevirt.io/network-to-pci-address`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
virt-controller creates an annotation that will hold the mapping between the (VMI) SR-IOV networks and PCI addresses, e.g: `kubevirt.io/network-pci-map`.
```
